# 9-2. Comparison of Two Population Means: Small, Independent Samples

When one or the other of the sample sizes is small, as is often the case in practice, the Central Limit Theorem does not apply. We must then impose conditions on the population to give statistical validity to the test procedure. We will assume that both populations from which the samples are taken have a normal probability distribution and that their standard deviations are equal.

### Confidence Intervals

When the two populations are normally distributed and have equal standard deviations, the following formula for a confidence interval for μ1−μ2μ1−μ2 is valid.

#### 100\(1−α\)%100\(1−α\)% Confidence Interval for the Difference Between Two Population Means: Small, Independent Samples

\(x−−1−x−−2\)±tα∕2s2p\(1n1+1n2\)−−−−−−−−−−−√wheres2p=\(n1−1\)s21+\(n2−1\)s22n1+n2−2\(x-1−x-2\)±tα∕2sp2\(1n1+1n2\)wheresp2=\(n1−1\)s12+\(n2−1\)s22n1+n2−2

The number of degrees of freedom is df=n1+n2−2.df=n1+n2−2.

The samples must be independent, the populations must be normal, and the population standard deviations must be equal. “Small” samples means that either n1&lt;30n1&lt;30 or n2&lt;30.n2&lt;30.

The quantity s2psp2 is called the **pooled sample variance**. It is a weighted average of the two estimates s21s12 and s22s22 of the common variance σ21=σ22σ12=σ22 of the two populations.

#### EXAMPLE 4

A software company markets a new computer game with two experimental packaging designs. Design 1 is sent to 11 stores; their average sales the first month is 52 units with sample standard deviation 12 units. Design 2 is sent to 6 stores; their average sales the first month is 46 units with sample standard deviation 10 units. Construct a point estimate and a 95% confidence interval for the difference in average monthly sales between the two package designs.

Solution:



### Hypothesis Testing

Testing hypotheses concerning the difference of two population means using small samples is done precisely as it is done for large samples, using the following standardized test statistic. The same conditions on the populations that were required for constructing a confidence interval for the difference of the means must also be met when hypotheses are tested.

#### Standardized Test Statistic for Hypothesis Tests Concerning the Difference Between Two Population Means: Small, Independent Samples

T=\(x−−1−x−−2\)−D0s2p\(1n1+1n2\)√wheres2p=\(n1−1\)s21+\(n2−1\)s22n1+n2−2T=\(x-1−x-2\)−D0sp2\(1n1+1n2\)wheresp2=\(n1−1\)s12+\(n2−1\)s22n1+n2−2

The test statistic has Student’s _t_-distribution with df=n1+n2−2df=n1+n2−2 degrees of freedom.

The samples must be independent, the populations must be normal, and the population standard deviations must be equal. “Small” samples means that either n1&lt;30n1&lt;30 or n2&lt;30.n2&lt;30.

#### EXAMPLE 5

Refer to [Note 9.11 "Example 4"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s13-two-sample-problems.html#fwk-shafer-ch09_s02_s01_n02) concerning the mean sales per month for the same computer game but sold with two package designs. Test at the 1% level of significance whether the data provide sufficient evidence to conclude that the mean sales per month of the two designs are different. Use the critical value approach.

Solution:



#### EXAMPLE 6

Perform the test of [Note 9.13 "Example 5"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s13-two-sample-problems.html#fwk-shafer-ch09_s02_s02_n02) using the _p_-value approach.

Solution:

