# 9-3. Exercises



#### EXERCISES

1. **BASIC**

   In all exercises for this section assume that the population of differences is normal.

2. Use the following paired sample data for this exercise.Population 1Population 23528322635273526362935273629Population 135323535363536Population 228262726292729
   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 95% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 10% level of significance, the hypothesis that μ1−μ2&gt;7μ1−μ2&gt;7 as an alternative to the null hypothesis that μ1−μ2=7.μ1−μ2=7.
3. Use the following paired sample data for this exercise.Population 1Population 210381127106967311088Population 110312796110Population 2811067388Population 1Population 290701189513010910683Population 190118130106Population 2709510983
   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 90% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that μ1−μ2&lt;24μ1−μ2&lt;24 as an alternative to the null hypothesis that μ1−μ2=24.μ1−μ2=24.
4. Use the following paired sample data for this exercise.Population 1Population 24053274255683450Population 140275534Population 253426850
   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 99% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 10% level of significance, the hypothesis that μ1−μ2≠−12μ1−μ2≠−12 as an alternative to the null hypothesis that μ1−μ2=−12.μ1−μ2=−12.
5. Use the following paired sample data for this exercise.Population 1Population 2196212165182181199201210190205Population 1196165181201190Population 2212182199210205
   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 98% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 2% level of significance, the hypothesis that μ1−μ2≠−20μ1−μ2≠−20 as an alternative to the null hypothesis that μ1−μ2=−20.μ1−μ2=−20.
6. **APPLICATIONS**
7. Each of five laboratory mice was released into a maze twice. The five pairs of times to escape were:

   | Mouse | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | First release | 129 | 89 | 136 | 163 | 118 |
   | Second release | 113 | 97 | 139 | 85 | 75 |

   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 90% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 10% level of significance, the hypothesis that it takes mice less time to run the maze on the second trial, on average.

8. Eight golfers were asked to submit their latest scores on their favorite golf courses. These golfers were each given a set of newly designed clubs. After playing with the new clubs for a few months, the golfers were again asked to submit their latest scores on the same golf courses. The results are summarized below.

   | Golfer | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Own clubs | 77 | 80 | 69 | 73 | 73 | 72 | 75 | 77 |
   | New clubs | 72 | 81 | 68 | 73 | 75 | 70 | 73 | 75 |

   1. Compute d−−d- and _sd_.
   2. Give a point estimate for μ1−μ2=μd.μ1−μ2=μd.
   3. Construct the 99% confidence interval for μ1−μ2=μdμ1−μ2=μd from these data.
   4. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that on average golf scores are lower with the new clubs.

9. A neighborhood home owners association suspects that the recent appraisal values of the houses in the neighborhood conducted by the county government for taxation purposes is too high. It hired a private company to appraise the values of ten houses in the neighborhood. The results, in thousands of dollars, are

   | House | County Government | Private Company |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | 1 | 217 | 219 |
   | 2 | 350 | 338 |
   | 3 | 296 | 291 |
   | 4 | 237 | 237 |
   | 5 | 237 | 235 |
   | 6 | 272 | 269 |
   | 7 | 257 | 239 |
   | 8 | 277 | 275 |
   | 9 | 312 | 320 |
   | 10 | 335 | 335 |

   1. Give a point estimate for the difference between the mean private appraisal of all such homes and the government appraisal of all such homes.
   2. Construct the 99% confidence interval based on these data for the difference.
   3. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that appraised values by the county government of all such houses is greater than the appraised values by the private appraisal company.

10. In order to cut costs a wine producer is considering using duo or 1 + 1 corks in place of full natural wood corks, but is concerned that it could affect buyers’s perception of the quality of the wine. The wine producer shipped eight pairs of bottles of its best young wines to eight wine experts. Each pair includes one bottle with a natural wood cork and one with a duo cork. The experts are asked to rate the wines on a one to ten scale, higher numbers corresponding to higher quality. The results are:

    | Wine Expert | Duo Cork | Wood Cork |
    | :--- | :--- | :--- |
    | 1 | 8.5 | 8.5 |
    | 2 | 8.0 | 8.5 |
    | 3 | 6.5 | 8.0 |
    | 4 | 7.5 | 8.5 |
    | 5 | 8.0 | 7.5 |
    | 6 | 8.0 | 8.0 |
    | 7 | 9.0 | 9.0 |
    | 8 | 7.0 | 7.5 |

    1. Give a point estimate for the difference between the mean ratings of the wine when bottled are sealed with different kinds of corks.
    2. Construct the 90% confidence interval based on these data for the difference.
    3. Test, at the 10% level of significance, the hypothesis that on the average duo corks decrease the rating of the wine.

11. Engineers at a tire manufacturing corporation wish to test a new tire material for increased durability. To test the tires under realistic road conditions, new front tires are mounted on each of 11 company cars, one tire made with a production material and the other with the experimental material. After a fixed period the 11 pairs were measured for wear. The amount of wear for each tire \(in mm\) is shown in the table:

    | Car | Production | Experimental |
    | :--- | :--- | :--- |
    | 1 | 5.1 | 5.0 |
    | 2 | 6.5 | 6.5 |
    | 3 | 3.6 | 3.1 |
    | 4 | 3.5 | 3.7 |
    | 5 | 5.7 | 4.5 |
    | 6 | 5.0 | 4.1 |
    | 7 | 6.4 | 5.3 |
    | 8 | 4.7 | 2.6 |
    | 9 | 3.2 | 3.0 |
    | 10 | 3.5 | 3.5 |
    | 11 | 6.4 | 5.1 |

    1. Give a point estimate for the difference in mean wear.
    2. Construct the 99% confidence interval for the difference based on these data.
    3. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that the mean wear with the experimental material is less than that for the production material.

12. A marriage counselor administered a test designed to measure overall contentment to 30 randomly selected married couples. The scores for each couple are given below. A higher number corresponds to greater contentment or happiness.

    | Couple | Husband | Wife |
    | :--- | :--- | :--- |
    | 1 | 47 | 44 |
    | 2 | 44 | 46 |
    | 3 | 49 | 44 |
    | 4 | 53 | 44 |
    | 5 | 42 | 43 |
    | 6 | 45 | 45 |
    | 7 | 48 | 47 |
    | 8 | 45 | 44 |
    | 9 | 52 | 44 |
    | 10 | 47 | 42 |
    | 11 | 40 | 34 |
    | 12 | 45 | 42 |
    | 13 | 40 | 43 |
    | 14 | 46 | 41 |
    | 15 | 47 | 45 |
    | 16 | 46 | 45 |
    | 17 | 46 | 41 |
    | 18 | 46 | 41 |
    | 19 | 44 | 45 |
    | 20 | 45 | 43 |
    | 21 | 48 | 38 |
    | 22 | 42 | 46 |
    | 23 | 50 | 44 |
    | 24 | 46 | 51 |
    | 25 | 43 | 45 |
    | 26 | 50 | 40 |
    | 27 | 46 | 46 |
    | 28 | 42 | 41 |
    | 29 | 51 | 41 |
    | 30 | 46 | 47 |

    1. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that on average men and women are not equally happy in marriage.
    2. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that on average men are happier than women in marriage.

13. **LARGE DATA SET EXERCISES**
14. Large Data Set 5 lists the scores for 25 randomly selected students on practice SAT reading tests before and after taking a two-week SAT preparation course. Denote the population of all students who have taken the course as Population 1 and the population of all students who have not taken the course as Population 2.

    [http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data5.xls](http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data5.xls)

    1. Compute the 25 differences in the order  after− before after− before, their mean d−−d-, and their sample standard deviation _sd_.
    2. Give a point estimate for μd=μ1−μ2μd=μ1−μ2, the difference in the mean score of all students who have taken the course and the mean score of all who have not.
    3. Construct a 98% confidence interval for μd.μd.
    4. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that the mean SAT score increases by at least ten points by taking the two-week preparation course.

15. Large Data Set 12 lists the scores on one round for 75 randomly selected members at a golf course, first using their own original clubs, then two months later after using new clubs with an experimental design. Denote the population of all golfers using their own original clubs as Population 1 and the population of all golfers using the new style clubs as Population 2.

    [http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data12.xls](http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data12.xls)

    1. Compute the 75 differences in the order  original clubs− new clubs original clubs− new clubs, their mean d−−d-, and their sample standard deviation _sd_.
    2. Give a point estimate for μd=μ1−μ2μd=μ1−μ2, the difference in the mean score of all golfers using their original clubs and the mean score of all golfers using the new kind of clubs.
    3. Construct a 90% confidence interval for μd.μd.
    4. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that the mean golf score decreases by at least one stroke by using the new kind of clubs.

16. Consider the previous problem again. Since the data set is so large, it is reasonable to use the standard normal distribution instead of Student’s _t_-distribution with 74 degrees of freedom.
    1. Construct a 90% confidence interval for μdμd using the standard normal distribution, meaning that the formula is d−−±zα∕2sdn√.d-±zα∕2sdn. \(The computations done in part \(a\) of the previous problem still apply and need not be redone.\) How does the result obtained here compare to the result obtained in part \(c\) of the previous problem?
    2. Test, at the 1% level of significance, the hypothesis that the mean golf score decreases by at least one stroke by using the new kind of clubs, using the standard normal distribution. \(All the work done in part \(d\) of the previous problem applies, except the critical value is now zαzα instead of tαtα \(or the _p_-value can be computed exactly instead of only approximated, if you used the _p_-value approach\).\) How does the result obtained here compare to the result obtained in part \(c\) of the previous problem?
    3. Construct the 99% confidence intervals for μdμd using both the t-t- and z-z-distributions. How much difference is there in the results now?

