# 10-2. Exercises

## 1. **BASIC**

**Ex 1.** With the exception of the exercises at the end of [Section 10.3 "Modelling Linear Relationships with Randomness Present"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s14-03-modelling-linear-relationships.html), the first Basic exercise in each of the following sections through [Section 10.7 "Estimation and Prediction"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s14-07-estimation-and-prediction.html) uses the data from the first exercise here, the second Basic exercise uses the data from the second exercise here, and so on, and similarly for the Application exercises. Save your computations done on these exercises so that you do not need to repeat them later.

**Ex 2.** For the sample data  
                              x    0    1    3    5    8  
                              y    2    4    6    5    9

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 3.** For the sample data  
                               x    0    2    3    6    9  
                               y    0    3    3    4    8

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 4.** For the sample data  
                                 x    1    3    4    6    8  
                                 y    4    1    3   −1   0

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 5.** For the sample data  
                                  x    1    2    4    7    9  
                                  y    5    5    6   −3   0

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 6.** For the sample data  
                                   x    1    1    3    4    5  
                                   y    2    1    5    3    4

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 7.** For the sample data  
                                  x    1    3    5    5    8  
                                  y    5  −2    2  −1  −3

1. Draw the scatter plot.
2. Based on the scatter plot, predict the sign of the linear correlation coefficient. Explain your answer.
3. Compute the linear correlation coefficient and compare its sign to your answer to part \(b\).

**Ex 8.** Compute the linear correlation coefficient for the sample data summarized by the following information:   
                                                       $$n=5, Σ​​x=25, Σ​​y=24, $$   
                                               $$Σ​​x^2=165, Σ​​xy=144,  Σ​​y^2=134, $$   
                                                                     $$1≤x≤9$$   


**Ex 9.** Compute the linear correlation coefficient for the sample data summarized by the following information:  
                                                   $$n=5, Σ​​x=31, Σ​​y=18, $$   
                                            $$Σ​​x^2=253, Σ​​xy=148, Σ​​y^2=90, $$   
                                                                  $$2≤x≤12 $$   


**Ex 10.** Compute the linear correlation coefficient for the sample data summarized by the following information:  
                                                    $$n=10, Σ​​x=0,  Σ​​y=24, $$   
                                               $$Σ​​x^2=60, Σ​​xy=−87,Σ​​y^2=234, $$     
                                                               $$ −4≤x≤4$$   


**Ex 11.** Compute the linear correlation coefficient for the sample data summarized by the following information:  
                                                        $$n=10, Σ​​x=−3,  Σ​​y=55,$$   
                                                $$ Σ​​x^2=263, Σ​​xy=−355,Σ​​y^2=917,$$   
                                                                  $$ −10≤x≤10$$ 

## **2. APPLICATIONS**

**Ex 12.** The age $$x $$ in months and vocabulary $$y$$ were measured for six children, with the results shown in the table.  
  
            x    13    14    15    16    16    18  
            y      8    10    15     20    27    30

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 13.** The curb weight $$x$$ in hundreds of pounds and braking distance $$y$$ in feet, at 50 miles per hour on dry pavement, were measured for five vehicles, with the results shown in the table.  
  
             x      25     27.5     32.5     35      45  
             y    105     125      140    140    150

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 14.** The age $$x$$ and resting heart rate $$y$$ were measured for ten men, with the results shown in the table.  
  
        x    20    23    30    37    35    45    51    55    60    63

        y    72    71    73    74    74    73    72    79    75    77     
  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 15.** The wind speed $$x$$ in miles per hour and wave height $$y$$ in feet were measured under various conditions on an enclosed deep water sea, with the results shown in the table,  
  
        x      0       0      2     7     7      9      13      20      22     31

       y   2.0   0.0   0.3  0.7  3.3   4.9     4.9     3.0   6.9    5.9  

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 16.** The advertising expenditure $$x$$ and sales $$y$$ in thousands of dollars for a small retail business in its first eight years in operation are shown in the table.  
  
        x      1.4     1.6      1.6     2.0     2.0      2.2      2.4    2.6

        y    180    184     190    220    186     215     205   240 

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 17.** The height $$x$$ at age 2 and $$y$$ at age 20, both in inches, for ten women are tabulated in the table.  
  
     x      31.3      31.7      32.5      33.5      34.4  
     y      60.7      61.0      63.1      64.2      65.9  
  
     x      35.2      35.8      32.7      33.6      34.8  
     y      68.2       67.6      62.3      64.9     66.8

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 18.** The course average $$x $$ just before a final exam and the score $$y$$ on the final exam were recorded for 15 randomly selected students in a large physics class, with the results shown in the table.  
  
    x      69.3      87.7      50.5      51.9     82.7  
    y       56          89         55          49         61  
  
    x      70.5      72.4      91.7      83.3     86.5  
    y        66          72        83          73         82  
  
    x      79.3      78.5      75.7      52.3     62.2  
    y        92         80          64         18         76

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 19.** The table shows the acres $$x$$ of corn planted and acres $$y$$ of corn harvested, in millions of acres, in a particular country in ten successive years.  
  
    x      75.7     78.9     78.6     80.9     81.8  
    y      68.8     69.3     70.9     73.6     75.1  
  
    x      78.3     93.5     85.9     86.4     88.2  
    y      70.6     86.5     78.6     79.5     81.4

  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 20.** Fifty male subjects drank a measured amount $$x$$ \(in ounces\) of a medication and the concentration $$y$$ \(in percent\) in their blood of the active ingredient was measured 30 minutes later. The sample data are summarized by the following information.  
  
                                             $$n=50, Σ​x=112.5, Σ​y=4.83,  $$   
                                 $$Σx^2=356.25,  Σxy=15.255,Σy^2=0.667, $$   
                                                                  $$0≤x≤4.5$$   
  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 21.** In an effort to produce a formula for estimating the age of large free-standing oak trees non-invasively, the girth $$x$$ \(in inches\) five feet off the ground of 15 such trees of known age $$y$$ \(in years\) was measured. The sample data are summarized by the following information.  
  
                                                $$n=15, Σ​x=3368, Σ​y=6496, $$   
                          $$Σ​x^2=917,780, Σ​xy=1,933,219, Σ​y^2=4,260,666, $$   
                                                              $$74≤x≤395$$   
  
Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 22.** Construction standards specify the strength of concrete 28 days after it is poured. For 30 samples of various types of concrete the strength $$x$$ after 3 days and the strength $$y$$ after 28 days \(both in hundreds of pounds per square inch\) were measured. The sample data are summarized by the following information.  
                                                 $$n=30, Σ​x=501.6, Σ​y=1338.8, $$   
                                $$ Σ​x^2=8724.74, Σ​xy=23,246.55,  Σ​y^2=61,980.14$$   
                                                            $$11≤x≤22$$   


Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

**Ex 23.** Power-generating facilities used forecasts of temperature to forecast energy demand. The average temperature _x_ \(degrees Fahrenheit\) and the day’s energy demand $$y$$ \(million watt-hours\) were recorded on 40 randomly selected winter days in the region served by a power company. The sample data are summarized by the following information.  
                                             $$n=40, Σ​x=2000, Σ​y=2969,$$   
                                      $$Σ​x^2=101,340 , Σ​xy=143,042,   Σ​y^2=243,027$$   
                                                                 $$40≤x≤60$$ 

Compute the linear correlation coefficient for these sample data and interpret its meaning in the context of the problem.

## **3. ADDITIONAL EXERCISES**

**Ex 24.** In each case state whether you expect the two variables $$x$$ and $$y$$ indicated to have positive, negative, or zero correlation.

1. the number $$x$$ of pages in a book and the age $$y$$ of the author
2. the number $$x$$ of pages in a book and the age $$y$$ of the intended reader
3. the weight $$x$$ of an automobile and the fuel economy $$y$$ in miles per gallon
4. the weight $$x$$ of an automobile and the reading $$y$$ on its odometer
5. the amount $$x$$ of a sedative a person took an hour ago and the time $$y$$ it takes him to respond to a stimulus

**Ex 25.** In each case state whether you expect the two variables $$x$$ and $$y$$ indicated to have positive, negative, or zero correlation.

1. the length $$x$$ of time an emergency flare will burn and the length $$y$$ of time the match used to light it burned
2. the average length $$x$$ of time that calls to a retail call center are on hold one day and the number $$y$$ of calls received that day
3. the length $$x$$ of a regularly scheduled commercial flight between two cities and the headwind $$y$$ encountered by the aircraft
4. the value $$x$$ of a house and the its size $$y$$ in square feet
5. the average temperature $$x$$ on a winter day and the energy consumption $$y$$ of the furnace

**Ex 26.** Changing the units of measurement on two variables $$x$$ and $$y$$ should not change the linear correlation coefficient. Moreover, most change of units amount to simply multiplying one unit by the other \(for example, 1 foot = 12 inches\). Multiply each $$x$$ value in the table in Exercise 1 by two and compute the linear correlation coefficient for the new data set. Compare the new value of $$r$$ to the one for the original data.

**Ex 27.** Refer to the previous exercise. Multiply each $$x$$ value in the table in Exercise 2 by two, multiply each $$y$$ value by three, and compute the linear correlation coefficient for the new data set. Compare the new value of $$r$$ to the one for the original data.

**Ex 28.** Reversing the roles of $$x$$ and $$y$$ in the data set of Exercise 1 produces the data set  
            x     2     4     6     5      9  
            y     0     1     3     5      8

Compute the linear correlation coefficient of the new set of data and compare it to what you got in Exercise 1.

**Ex 29.** In the context of the previous problem, look at the formula for $$r$$ and see if you can tell why what you observed there must be true for every data set.

## **4. LARGE DATA SET EXERCISES**

{% file src="../.gitbook/assets/data1 \(1\).xls" caption="Data Set 1" %}

{% file src="../.gitbook/assets/data12 \(2\).xls" caption="Data Set 12" %}

{% file src="../.gitbook/assets/data13 \(3\).xls" caption="Data Set 13" %}

**Ex 30.** Large **Data Set 1** lists the SAT scores and GPAs of 1,000 students. Compute the linear correlation coefficient $$r$$ ****. Compare its value to your comments on the appearance and strength of any linear trend in the scatter diagram that you constructed in the first large data set problem for [Section 10.1 "Linear Relationships Between Variables"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/fwk-shafer-ch10_s01#fwk-shafer-ch10_s01).

**Ex 31.** Large **Data Set 12** lists the golf scores on one round of golf for 75 golfers first using their own original clubs, then using clubs of a new, experimental design \(after two months of familiarization with the new clubs\). Compute the linear correlation coefficient $$r$$ . Compare its value to your comments on the appearance and strength of any linear trend in the scatter diagram that you constructed in the second large data set problem for [Section 10.1 "Linear Relationships Between Variables"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/fwk-shafer-ch10_s01#fwk-shafer-ch10_s01).

**Ex 32.** Large **Data Set 13** records the number of bidders and sales price of a particular type of antique grandfather clock at 60 auctions. Compute the linear correlation coefficient $$r$$ . Compare its value to your comments on the appearance and strength of any linear trend in the scatter diagram that you constructed in the third large data set problem for [Section 10.1 "Linear Relationships Between Variables"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/fwk-shafer-ch10_s01#fwk-shafer-ch10_s01).

