# 7-4. Sample Size Considerations

Sampling is typically done with a set of clear objectives in mind. For example, an economist might wish to estimate the mean yearly income of workers in a particular industry at 90% confidence and to within $500. Since sampling costs time, effort, and money, it would be useful to be able to estimate the smallest size sample that is likely to meet these criteria.

### Estimating _μ_

The confidence interval formulas for estimating a population mean _μ_ have the form x−−±E.x-±E. When the population standard deviation _σ_ is known,E=zα∕2σn−−√E=zα∕2σn

The number zα∕2zα∕2 is determined by the desired level of confidence. To say that we wish to estimate the mean to within a certain number of units means that we want the margin of error _E_ to be no larger than that number. Thus we obtain the minimum sample size needed by solving the displayed equation for _n_.

#### Minimum Sample Size for Estimating a Population Mean

The estimated minimum sample size _n_ needed to estimate a population mean _μ_ to within _E_ units at 100\(1−α\)100\(1−α\)% confidence isn=\(zα∕2\)2σ2E2 \(rounded up\)n=\(zα∕2\)2σ2E2 \(rounded up\)

To apply the formula we must have prior knowledge of the population in order to have an estimate of its standard deviation _σ_. In all the examples and exercises the population standard deviation will be given.

#### EXAMPLE 8

Find the minimum sample size necessary to construct a 99% confidence interval for _μ_ with a margin of error _E_ = 0.2. Assume that the population standard deviation is _σ_ = 1.3.

Solution:





#### EXAMPLE 9

An economist wishes to estimate, with a 95% confidence interval, the yearly income of welders with at least five years experience to within $1,000. He estimates that the range of incomes is no more than $24,000, so using the Empirical Rule he estimates the population standard deviation to be about one-sixth as much, or about $4,000. Find the estimated minimum sample size required.

Solution:



### Estimating _p_

The confidence interval formula for estimating a population proportion _p_ is pˆ±Ep^±E, whereE=zα∕2pˆ\(1−pˆ\)n−−−−−−−−√E=zα∕2p^\(1−p^\)n

The number zα∕2zα∕2 is determined by the desired level of confidence. To say that we wish to estimate the population proportion to within a certain number of percentage points means that we want the margin of error _E_ to be no larger than that number \(expressed as a proportion\). Thus we obtain the minimum sample size needed by solving the displayed equation for _n_.

#### Minimum Sample Size for Estimating a Population Proportion

The estimated minimum sample size _n_ needed to estimate a population proportion _p_ to within _E_ at 100\(1−α\)100\(1−α\)% confidence isn=\(zα∕2\)2pˆ\(1−pˆ\)E2 \(rounded up\)n=\(zα∕2\)2p^\(1−p^\)E2 \(rounded up\)

There is a dilemma here: the formula for estimating how large a sample to take contains the number pˆp^, which we know only after we have taken the sample. There are two ways out of this dilemma. Typically the researcher will have some idea as to the value of the population proportion _p_, hence of what the sample proportion pˆp^ is likely to be. For example, if last month 37% of all voters thought that state taxes are too high, then it is likely that the proportion with that opinion this month will not be dramatically different, and we would use the value 0.37 for pˆp^ in the formula.

The second approach to resolving the dilemma is simply to replace pˆp^ in the formula by 0.5. This is because if pˆp^ is large then 1−pˆ1−p^ is small, and vice versa, which limits their product to a maximum value of 0.25, which occurs when pˆ=0.5.p^=0.5. This is called the most conservative estimate, since it gives the largest possible estimate of _n_.

#### EXAMPLE 10

Find the necessary minimum sample size to construct a 98% confidence interval for _p_ with a margin of error _E_ = 0.05,

1. assuming that no prior knowledge about _p_ is available; and
2. assuming that prior studies suggest that _p_ is about 0.1.

Solution:





#### EXAMPLE 11

A dermatologist wishes to estimate the proportion of young adults who apply sunscreen regularly before going out in the sun in the summer. Find the minimum sample size required to estimate the proportion to within three percentage points, at 90% confidence.

Solution:





