# 11-1. Exercises

## 1. **BASIC**

1. Find χ20.01χ0.012 for each of the following number of degrees of freedom.
   1. df=5df=5
   2. df=11df=11
   3. df=25df=25
2. Find χ20.05χ0.052 for each of the following number of degrees of freedom.
   1. df=6df=6
   2. df=12df=12
   3. df=30df=30
3. Find χ20.10χ0.102 for each of the following number of degrees of freedom.
   1. df=6df=6
   2. df=12df=12
   3. df=30df=30
4. Find χ20.01χ0.012 for each of the following number of degrees of freedom.
   1. df=7df=7
   2. df=10df=10
   3. df=20df=20
5. For df=7df=7 and α=0.05α=0.05, find
   1. χ2αχα2
   2. χ2α2χα22
6. For df=17df=17 and α=0.01α=0.01, find
   1. χ2αχα2
   2. χ2α2χα22
7. A data sample is sorted into a 2 × 2 contingency table based on two factors, each of which has two levels.

   |  | Factor 1 |  |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Level 1 | Level 2 | Row Total |  |  |
   | Factor 2 | Level 1 | 2020 | 1010 | _R_ |
   | Level 2 | 1515 | 55 | _R_ |  |
   | Column Total | _C_ | _C_ | _n_ |  |

   1. Find the column totals, the row totals, and the grand total, _n_, of the table.
   2. Find the expected number _E_ of observations for each cell based on the assumption that the two factors are independent \(that is, just use the formula E=\(R×C\)∕nE=\(R×C\)∕n\).
   3. Find the value of the chi-square test statistic χ2.χ2.
   4. Find the number of degrees of freedom of the chi-square test statistic.

8. A data sample is sorted into a 3 × 2 contingency table based on two factors, one of which has three levels and the other of which has two levels.

   |  | Factor 1 |  |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Level 1 | Level 2 | Row Total |  |  |
   | Factor 2 | Level 1 | 2020 | 1010 | _R_ |
   | Level 2 | 1515 | 55 | _R_ |  |
   | Level 3 | 1010 | 2020 | _R_ |  |
   | Column Total | _C_ | _C_ | _n_ |  |

   1. Find the column totals, the row totals, and the grand total, _n_, of the table.
   2. Find the expected number _E_ of observations for each cell based on the assumption that the two factors are independent \(that is, just use the formula E=\(R×C\)∕nE=\(R×C\)∕n\).
   3. Find the value of the chi-square test statistic χ2.χ2.
   4. Find the number of degrees of freedom of the chi-square test statistic.

## **2. APPLICATIONS**

1. A child psychologist believes that children perform better on tests when they are given perceived freedom of choice. To test this belief, the psychologist carried out an experiment in which 200 third graders were randomly assigned to two groups, _A_ and _B_. Each child was given the same simple logic test. However in group _B_, each child was given the freedom to choose a text booklet from many with various drawings on the covers. The performance of each child was rated as Very Good, Good, and Fair. The results are summarized in the table provided. Test, at the 5% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to support the psychologist’s belief.

   |  | Group |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | _A_ | _B_ |  |  |
   | Performance | Very Good | 32 | 29 |
   | Good | 55 | 61 |  |
   | Fair | 10 | 13 |  |

2. In regard to wine tasting competitions, many experts claim that the first glass of wine served sets a reference taste and that a different reference wine may alter the relative ranking of the other wines in competition. To test this claim, three wines, _A_, _B_ and _C_, were served at a wine tasting event. Each person was served a single glass of each wine, but in different orders for different guests. At the close, each person was asked to name the best of the three. One hundred seventy-two people were at the event and their top picks are given in the table provided. Test, at the 1% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to support the claim that wine experts’ preference is dependent on the first served wine.

   |  | Top Pick |  |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | _A_ | _B_ | _C_ |  |  |
   | First Glass | _A_ | 12 | 31 | 27 |
   | _B_ | 15 | 40 | 21 |  |
   | _C_ | 10 | 9 | 7 |  |

3. Is being left-handed hereditary? To answer this question, 250 adults are randomly selected and their handedness and their parents’ handedness are noted. The results are summarized in the table provided. Test, at the 1% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to conclude that there is a hereditary element in handedness.

   |  | Number of Parents Left-Handed |  |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | 0 | 1 | 2 |  |  |
   | Handedness | Left | 8 | 10 | 12 |
   | Right | 178 | 21 | 21 |  |

4. Some geneticists claim that the genes that determine left-handedness also govern development of the language centers of the brain. If this claim is true, then it would be reasonable to expect that left-handed people tend to have stronger language abilities. A study designed to text this claim randomly selected 807 students who took the Graduate Record Examination \(GRE\). Their scores on the language portion of the examination were classified into three categories: _low_, _average_, and _high_, and their handedness was also noted. The results are given in the table provided. Test, at the 5% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to conclude that left-handed people tend to have stronger language abilities.

   |  | GRE English Scores |  |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Low | Average | High |  |  |
   | Handedness | Left | 18 | 40 | 22 |
   | Right | 201 | 360 | 166 |  |

5. It is generally believed that children brought up in stable families tend to do well in school. To verify such a belief, a social scientist examined 290 randomly selected students’ records in a public high school and noted each student’s family structure and academic status four years after entering high school. The data were then sorted into a 2 × 3 contingency table with two factors. Factor 1 has two levels: _graduated_ and _did not graduate_. Factor 2 has three levels: _no parent_, _one parent_, and _two parents_. The results are given in the table provided. Test, at the 1% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to conclude that family structure matters in school performance of the students.

   |  | Academic Status |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Graduated | Did Not Graduate |  |  |
   | Family | No parent | 18 | 31 |
   | One parent | 101 | 44 |  |
   | Two parents | 70 | 26 |  |

6. A large middle school administrator wishes to use celebrity influence to encourage students to make healthier choices in the school cafeteria. The cafeteria is situated at the center of an open space. Everyday at lunch time students get their lunch and a drink in three separate lines leading to three separate serving stations. As an experiment, the school administrator displayed a poster of a popular teen pop star drinking milk at each of the three areas where drinks are provided, except the milk in the poster is different at each location: one shows white milk, one shows strawberry-flavored pink milk, and one shows chocolate milk. After the first day of the experiment the administrator noted the students’ milk choices separately for the three lines. The data are given in the table provided. Test, at the 1% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to conclude that the posters had some impact on the students’ drink choices.

   |  | Student Choice |  |  |
   | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
   | Regular | Strawberry | Chocolate |  |
   | Poster Choice |  |  |  |
   | Regular | 38 | 28 | 40 |
   | Strawberry | 18 | 51 | 24 |
   | Chocolate | 32 | 32 | 53 |

## **3. LARGE DATA SET EXERCISE**

1. Large Data Set 8 records the result of a survey of 300 randomly selected adults who go to movie theaters regularly. For each person the gender and preferred type of movie were recorded. Test, at the 5% level of significance, whether there is sufficient evidence in the data to conclude that the factors “gender” and “preferred type of movie” are dependent.

   [http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data8.xls](http://www.gone.2012books.lardbucket.org/sites/all/files/data8.xls)

