# 11-4. F-Tests in One-Way ANOVA

In [Chapter 9 "Two-Sample Problems"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s13-two-sample-problems.html) we saw how to compare two population means μ1μ1 and μ2.μ2. In this section we will learn to compare three or more population means at the same time, which is often of interest in practical applications. For example, an administrator at a university may be interested in knowing whether student grade point averages are the same for different majors. In another example, an oncologist may be interested in knowing whether patients with the same type of cancer have the same average survival times under several different competing cancer treatments.

In general, suppose there are _K_ normal populations with possibly different means, μ1,μ2,…,μKμ1,μ2,…,μK, but all with the same variance σ2.σ2. The study question is whether all the _K_ population means are the same. We formulate this question as the test of hypothesesH0 vs. Ha::μ1=μ2= ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ =μK not all K population means are equalH0:μ1=μ2= · · · =μK vs. Ha: not all K population means are equal

To perform the test _K_ independent random samples are taken from the _K_ normal populations. The _K_ sample means, the _K_ sample variances, and the _K_ sample sizes are summarized in the table:

| Population | Sample Size | Sample Mean | Sample Variance |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | n1n1 | x−−1x-1 | s21s12 |
| 2 | n2n2 | x−−2x-2 | s22s22 |
| ⋮ | ⋮ | ⋮ | ⋮ |
| _K_ | nKnK | x−−Kx-K | s2KsK2 |

Define the following quantities:

The **combined sample size**:n=n1+n2+ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ +nKn=n1+n2+ · · · +nK

The **mean of the combined sample** of all _n_ observations:x−−=Σxn=n1x−−1+n2x−−2+ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ +nKx−−Knx-=Σxn=n1x-1+n2x-2+ · · · +nKx-Kn

The **mean square for treatment**:MST=n1\(x−−1−x−−\)2+n2\(x−−2−x−−\)2+ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ +nK\(x−−K−x−−\)2K−1MST=n1\(x-1−x-\)2+n2\(x-2−x-\)2+ · · · +nK\(x-K−x-\)2K−1

The **mean square for error**:MSE=\(n1−1\)s21+\(n2−1\)s22+ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ +\(nK−1\)s2Kn−KMSE=\(n1−1\)s12+\(n2−1\)s22+ · · · +\(nK−1\)sK2n−K

MST can be thought of as the variance between the _K_ individual independent random samples and MSE as the variance within the samples. This is the reason for the name “analysis of variance,” universally abbreviated ANOVA. The adjective “one-way” has to do with the fact that the sampling scheme is the simplest possible, that of taking one random sample from each population under consideration. If the means of the _K_ populations are all the same then the two quantities MST and MSE should be close to the same, so the null hypothesis will be rejected if the ratio of these two quantities is significantly greater than 1. This yields the following test statistic and methods and conditions for its use.

#### Test Statistic for Testing the Null Hypothesis that _K_ Population Means Are Equal

F=MSTMSEF=MSTMSE

If the _K_ populations are normally distributed with a common variance and if H0:μ1= ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ =μKH0:μ1= · · · =μK is true then under independent random sampling _F_ approximately follows an _F_-distribution with degrees of freedom df1=K−1df1=K−1 and df2=n−K.df2=n−K.

The test is right-tailed: _H_0 is rejected at level of significance αα if F≥Fα.F≥Fα.

As always the test is performed using the usual five-step procedure.

#### EXAMPLE 8

The average of grade point averages \(GPAs\) of college courses in a specific major is a measure of difficulty of the major. An educator wishes to conduct a study to find out whether the difficulty levels of different majors are the same. For such a study, a random sample of major grade point averages \(GPA\) of 11 graduating seniors at a large university is selected for each of the four majors mathematics, English, education, and biology. The data are given in [Table 11.17 "Difficulty Levels of College Majors"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s15-chi-square-tests-and-f-tests.html#fwk-shafer-ch11_s04_t01). Test, at the 5% level of significance, whether the data contain sufficient evidence to conclude that there are differences among the average major GPAs of these four majors.

TABLE 11.17 DIFFICULTY LEVELS OF COLLEGE MAJORS

| Mathematics | English | Education | Biology |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2.59 | 3.64 | 4.00 | 2.78 |
| 3.13 | 3.19 | 3.59 | 3.51 |
| 2.97 | 3.15 | 2.80 | 2.65 |
| 2.50 | 3.78 | 2.39 | 3.16 |
| 2.53 | 3.03 | 3.47 | 2.94 |
| 3.29 | 2.61 | 3.59 | 2.32 |
| 2.53 | 3.20 | 3.74 | 2.58 |
| 3.17 | 3.30 | 3.77 | 3.21 |
| 2.70 | 3.54 | 3.13 | 3.23 |
| 3.88 | 3.25 | 3.00 | 3.57 |
| 2.64 | 4.00 | 3.47 | 3.22 |

Solution:



#### EXAMPLE 9

A research laboratory developed two treatments which are believed to have the potential of prolonging the survival times of patients with an acute form of thymic leukemia. To evaluate the potential treatment effects 33 laboratory mice with thymic leukemia were randomly divided into three groups. One group received Treatment 1, one received Treatment 2, and the third was observed as a control group. The survival times of these mice are given in [Table 11.18 "Mice Survival Times in Days"](https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_introductory-statistics/s15-chi-square-tests-and-f-tests.html#fwk-shafer-ch11_s04_t02). Test, at the 1% level of significance, whether these data provide sufficient evidence to confirm the belief that at least one of the two treatments affects the average survival time of mice with thymic leukemia.

TABLE 11.18 MICE SURVIVAL TIMES IN DAYS

| Treatment 1 | Treatment 2 | Control |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 71 | 75 | 77 | 81 |
| 72 | 73 | 67 | 79 |
| 75 | 72 | 79 | 73 |
| 80 | 65 | 78 | 71 |
| 60 | 63 | 81 | 75 |
| 65 | 69 | 72 | 84 |
| 63 | 64 | 71 | 77 |
| 78 | 71 | 84 | 67 |
|  |  | 91 |  |

Solution:









